Chintang is an eastern Kiranti language belonging to the Tibeto-Burman branch of the Sino Tibetan language family. The nearest linguistic relatives are Athpare, Belhare, Chlng and Yakkha.
Chintang is a morphologically quite rich language. Finite verbs can be marked for person, number, tense, aspect, mood, and polarity whereas nouns are marked for case and number. There are three categories of number viz. singular, dual and plural. Singular is an unmarked category, whereas the dual and plural are marked by suffixes. Unlike in Nepali, there is no grammatical gender in Chintang. Chintang behaves ergatively with respect to case marking. It has split case marking based on person. The verbal morphology is considerably more complex than the nominal morphology in Chintang. The Chintang verb inflects for tense, aspect, polarity, and mood, and agrees in various alignment patterns with the single argument of intransitive verbs S and with both the A and P arguments of transitive verbs. All morphological categories of mood, aspect and tense are marked by suffixes on verbs.
Indicative mood and tense markers are basically fused and represented by portmanteaus of tense and mood marking suffixes. Chintang makes a robust use of various non-finite verb forms for a variety of functions. Non-finite verb forms are the most productive means of making complex sentences in Chintang.
Like many other South Asian languages, Chintang makes extensive use of complex predicates. In my research, I found basically three types of complex verbal forms in Chintang:
v1 + v2 compound, preverb and a stem form, and the borrowed verb compounds. In all these three types of complex predicates, the element in the right-most position gets full inflection, and in all forms there is the possibility for endoclitics to intrude between the two verb forms. But unlike in preverb-stem compounds and borrowed verb compounds, v2s in v1 + v2 compound forms require a disyllabic unit as a host to maintain their prosodic subcategorization constraint (see Bickel et al. 2007). If there is no inflectional suffix available to attach to the v1 stem, the epenthetic element -na is used to fulfill the requirement.
Adverbs, the topic of chapter 6, were discussed from both semantic and syntactic perspectives. There are hardly few mono-morphemic adverbs in this language. The majority of adverbs derive from a reduplication or triplication process. Syntactically, Chintang adverbs appear as a modifier of a verb, modifier of an adjective or modifier of an another adverb, and can occur in a number of different positions in a sentence.
The description and analysis of Chintang syntax begin in chapter 7, which investigates noun phrase structure in Chintang. NP structure is similar to that of the clause, the head is final and the pre-head order is syntactically free. There are simple, complex and headless noun phrases in Chintang. A simple NP contains only a pronoun or a noun which can be further modified by a number of modifiers, whereas a complex NP contains more than one NP combined either by a subordination or coordination process. In an NP, the head noun shows no agreement with the other modifying constituents except number agreement with the numeral.
Chintang is a verb-final language (SOV). In a basic declarative sentence all arguments usually precede the verb. In the unmarked word order an actor noun phrase normally precedes an instrumental one. Question formation does not necessarily change the word order, though the interrogative pronoun often takes the focus position immediately before the verb. Nevertheless, the Chintang language does not have a fixed word order, the arrangement of words in clauses do not result in a change of the linguistic meaning. The position of the verb is relatively fixed, but can be moved to the clause initial position. The most frequent word orders are SV, APV and AGTV, but other orders are always possible.
Interrogative pronouns can occur sentence initially, pre-verbally, and in situ. Chintang allows multiple questions (wh) in transitive clauses. Including juxtaposition, the comitative marker n and the alternative particle elo are sometimes used to coordinate two elements. But the coordination strategy is not very productive in this language. Unlike dative-marked experiencers of the Indo-Aryan languages (e.g. Nepali), there are nominative experiencers in Chintang, which trigger object agreement.
Nominalization is very productive in Chintang. Like in other Tibeto-Burman languages, nominalization in Chintang extends beyond its core function of deriving nominal items from non-nominals. Actually, it is observed in almost all levels of grammar. i.e. it converts (all) verbs and adverbials into nominals, it marks adjectives, demonstratives, participles, relative clauses, and complement clauses. Nominalization in Chintang is thus different from the standard concept of nominalization, because its input is not necessarily non-nominal and its output is not necessarily nominal (e.g. headed relative clauses). Although nominalization is found at all levels of Chintang grammar, derivation of nouns from non nominals or nominals occupies a dime role. A significant role of nominalization is seen in various subordinate clauses and in free-standing sentences.
There are four different types of complement clauses in terms of control behavior of their S/A and P arguments and agreement properties. The S/A arguments of the embedded and matrix clauses must be identical for all the infinitival complement clauses. However, there is no coreferentiality restriction in nominalized and samma complement clauses in Chintang. Transitivity, case assignment, control and agreement behavior are quite diverse.
There are both forward and backward control in Chintang.
Chintang shows an interesting diversity in adverbial clauses. There are both non finite and finite adverbial clauses, which are marked by various morphemes, especially clitics, affixes, and conjunctions. Even though all non-finite subordinate clauses lack tense, and mood, in Chintang we encounter person and number marking in purposive clauses as possessive prefixes. The -sa a converbal clauses and -si purposive clauses do not allow an overt S/A argument in the embedded clause, but both do allow patients, and locative arguments. But in contrast to -sa a and -si clauses, there is no obligatory control of arguments in the negation converb clause. All types of converbal clauses have in common that they all license some sort of focus marker on the embedded clause.
A finite subordinate clause is inflected for tense, aspect (optionally), mood, person and number. There are four types of finite clauses: adverbial clause with lok/lo, conditional clauses with =ha , sequential clauses with =kina/ki and conecessive clause with nuseya .
Besides these clauses, Chintang also borrows a number of temporal conjunctions from Nepali to form temporal adverbial clauses.
Chintang also has a moderate number of particles. All of them are uninflected and post-posed to the syntactic unit they modify. Besides this, Chintang also borrows a number of particles from Nepali. Among the native particles there are six clitics and seven independent words. Most of the clitics also function as endoclitics, which are attached inside a (morphological) word.