Classical Armenian nouns and adjectives display two numbers, singular and plural, and seven cases: Nominative, Accusative, Genitive, Dative, Locative, Ablative, and Instrumental. There is no purely grammatical gender of the sort found in languages such as Latin. There are several declension paradigms, which broadly fall into two categories: those with variable stems and those with invariable stems. One should note that stem variation is a phenomenon distinct from vocalic alternation. Vowel alternation occurs automatically whenever there is a change of stress due to the addition of a morpheme, and it therefore bears no relation to patterns of declension.
Verbal forms in Classical Armenian are built from two stems, the present and the aorist. One or both of these stems may contain a suffix inserted between the root and the inflectional vowel (in the present), or between root and ending (in the aorist). The present stem is the base for an indicative mood, subjunctive and (negative) imperative. The indicative mood separates into two tenses: present and imperfect. Nominal forms may arise from the present stem, namely an infinitive and participle. Inasmuch as verbal aspect is distinguished in Classical Armenian, the present system forms denote a developing or continuous action, while the aorist forms refer to an action's completion.
Word order in Classical Armenian is free, with words placed toward the beginning of an utterance gaining prominence. In Biblical translations, the word order often follows that of the Greek text.
Word order may affect the congruence between an adjective an the word it modifies. Attributive adjectives are undeclined when they precede a noun, declined when they follow the noun. For example, in John 10.32 one finds բազում գործս բարիս. Here, բազում is the uninflected N/Ac singular form of the adjective բազում, -աց 'much, many'; գործս is the inflected Ac plural form of the noun գործ, -ոց 'work, deed'; բարիս is the inflected Ac plural of the adjective բարի, -եաց 'good'. In predicate sentences, the predicated adjective is in the Nominative case and singular, even if the subject is plural, unless the adjective follows the copula directly. Thus one might have ազատ են Հայք 'The Armenians are free', but վարդապետք են իմաստումք 'Teachers are wise.'
The verb agrees with its subject in person and number. Coordinated subjects require a plural verb. Singular subjects with collective meaning may have either singular or plural verb forms.
Armenian has a wealth of words functioning as prepositions. Many of these, however, are adverbs or collocations of a simple preposition and a noun, which in turn govern a noun in the genitive. Prepositions generally precede the noun they govern, but some follow the noun as a postposition.
Classical Armenian has three demonstrative suffixes which are attached to the end of nouns. These are

-ս 'this, this here, this near to me';
-դ 'that, that right there, that next to you';
-ն 'that, that over there, that near to him'.
These correlate roughly to the use of Latin hic, iste, and ille, respectively. These particles, however, are indeclinable. Since Classical Armenian has no articles as such, an unqualified noun may be either definite or indefinite; these demonstrative suffixes are often used for marking a noun as definite (and in that sense overlap with զ-, which is pre-posed on definite nouns in the accusative). In this role -ն is by far the most commonly used; -ս and -դ are reserved for particular emphasis or change of subject. Note the possibility of overlap, e.g. աձսս could be either այս 'evil spirit' plus the accusative plural ending -ս, or the same noun in the singular but with the deictic suffix -ս. Moreover, one may find այսսս, that is, աձս + Ac Pl. -ս + suffix -ս.

There are a few tendencies in the usage of the demonstrative suffixes. Proper names rarely take demonstrative suffixes, e.g. թագաւոր-ն Պարսից 'the king of the Persians', where English inserts before 'Persians' an article which is not present in the Armenian. Another example is Արշակ արքայ 'Arshak the king'. When an adjective modifies a noun, typically only the noun receives a demonstrative suffix, e.g. վկայն սուրբ 'the holy martyr'. If a noun in the genitive qualifies a definite noun, typically the last word of the collocation receives the demonstrative suffix, e.g. բարեկան թագաւորի-ն 'the king's friend, the friend of the king'. Vocatives use the suffix -դ, e.g. Քրիստոս-դ 'O Christ'. Adjectives used as substantives may take demonstrative suffixes, as in չարն 'the evil one, Satan'; առաքեալքն 'the ones sent, the apostles', built from the participle առաքեալ 'sent'; գեղեցիկդ 'O beautiful one'.

Relative clauses may also take a demonstrative suffix. The suffix -ս, -դ, or -ն is added to the first stressed word of the relative clause.
Classical Armenian has a two-stem verbal system, wherein each verb form pertains either to a present or to an aorist stem of a given root. Generally, one or both of the stems will contain a suffix inserted directly after the root, thus preceding the thematic vowel in present forms and preceding the endings in aorist forms. There are several such suffixes in the present system (-ան-, -ն-, -չ-, -նչ-), but only one type, namely -(V)ց-, in the aorist system.

The distinction between present and aorist is not one of tense, but of aspect. Both imperfect and aorist indicative are past tenses; both present and aorist subjunctive lack tense altogether. Verbal forms built from the present stem denote a continuous, ongoing action -- an action in its development. By contrast, verbs forms built from the aorist stem refer to the completion of the action. These distinctions are without regard to the actual point on a timeline at which an action occurs; they point to the nature of the action described. In principle, then, one could find "present aorist" forms, "past present" forms, and so on. "Past present" forms, in this sense denoting past actions with continuous aspect, are essentially what the imperfect tense represents. There are no specifically "present aorist", that is, present completive forms; however the occasional use of the aorist subjunctive in the role of a future displays how the aorist may be used in reference to completive actions in the "non-past".

The aorist system also distinguishes two voices, active (A) and mediopassive (MP), by different sets of endings. The distinctions are discussed in the next lesson.

In Classical Armenian transitive verbs occur in both active and passive contructions. The distinction between active and passive, however, is not universally distinguished through morphology. That is to say, the contrast between active forms and passive forms does not hold throughout the Classical Armenian verbal system. In the present indicative, verbs of the ե-conjugation may form a passive by changing the stem vowel from ե to ի, e.g. վարեմ 'I lead' vs. վարիմ 'I am led'; ճանաչեմ զիմսն եւ ճանաչիմ յիմոցն 'I know my own and I am known by my own'. This distinction is in keeping with the distribution of verbs between the ե- and ի-conjugations, since most of the verbs in the ե-conjugation are transitive, most in the ի-conjugation intransitive. The ե-/ի- manner of active/passive contrast has been extended to the prohibitive and to the present subjunctive.

Classical Armenian has one true participle. This is a past participle formed from the aorist stem by addition of the ending -եալ. This is then declined according to the ո-declension, e.g. N Ac Sg. ասացեալ, G D Ab Sg. ասացելոյ (from *-եալ-ոյ), etc. For verbs whose presents are formed with simple -եմ or -իմ, the stem may lack the -եց suffix of the aorist. When simple present stems are paired with root aorists, the participle is formed from the simple verbal root as expected. 

The Classical Armenian participle is a past participle and makes no distinction between active or passive voice. For example ասացեալ 'having spoken' or 'having been said'; մեռեալ 'dead'; բերեալ 'having carried' or 'having been carried'. The participle may be inflected to function as an attributive or predicate adjective, e.g. զտուեալ հրամանս կատարէր 'he fulfilled the commands that had been given'. It may also be used as a substantive: ասացեալք մարգարէին 'the sayings of the prophet, the prophet's words'; ընկալայ զգրեալս քո 'I received your letter'.

The participle may also be used in periphrastic verbal constructions to denote completed actions. The tense of such constructions follows that of the auxiliary verb, present tense of the auxiliary yielding a perfect construction, imperfect auxiliary yielding a pluperfect. A future perfect is found with the subjunctive of եմ 'I am'. Some statements may omit the auxiliary altogether. In these constructions, the form of the participle remains unaltered, even in the plural. Examples are հրամայեալ է յԱստուածոյ զի... 'it is commanded by God that...'; թո'\եալ լիցին մեղք քո 'may your sins be forgiven'; ժամանակ իմ չեւ է հասեալ 'my time has not yet come'; ... ուր դպիրքն եւ ծերք ժողովեալ եին '... where the scribes and elders had gathered'.

There is a noteworthy construction involving what is termed the genitive subject. The participle may be used in an impersonal construction, whereby the -եալ from remains in the singular with a singular copula, and takes an accusative object. The subject, however, is placed in the genitive. For example, եկեղեցին զոր շինեալ էր մեծին Գրիգորի 'the church which Gregory the great had built'; եւ զայս ո՞չ է ընթերցեալ ձեր 'and have you not read this?'; արկեալ էր նոցա ուռկանս ի ծով 'they had thrown (their) nets into the lake'. Such expression seems to have arisen as a sort of possessive construct, with a phrase like նորա (Gen.) է գործեալ 'his is (the thing) done' > 'he has done' in parallel to նորա (Gen.) է հանդերձ 'his is clothing' > 'he has clothing'.

The -եալ participle may be used in conjunction with another finite verb where English might have two separate finite verbs, e.g. մատուցեալ բորոտ մի երկիր պագանէր մնա 'a leper approached and worshipped him'. The genitive subject is sometimes found in these constructions, even though it expresses the subject of both the participle and finite verb: թողեալ Յիսուսի զժողովուրդսն եկն ի տուն 'Jesus left the crowds and went to the house'; եւ նոցա առեալ զարծաթն արարին որպէս ուսանն 'and they took the money and did as they had been told'. The -եալ participle may also be used alone as a main verb in historical narrative: զայսու ժամանակաւ միաբանեալ Ալանք... մեծաւ ամբոխիւ տարածեալ ընդ աշխարհս մեր 'about this time the Alans united... and in a great host spread over our land'.

In post-classical times a mediopassive form in -իլ developed to distinguish verbs of the ի-conjugation.

The infinitive is regularly used as a complement after certain verbs, such as կամիմ 'I wish to', ունիմ 'I have to', տամ 'I have (someone) do (something)', սկսիմ 'I begin to', երկնչիմ 'I am afraid to', թողում 'I allow to'. Certain expressions are also common with the infinitive, e.g. լաւ է 'it is good to', արժան է 'it is right to'. The infinitive may be used with verbs of motion to indicate purpose: գայր յայտնել զաւետիսն 'he came (in order) to reveal the news'. Result may be indicated by use of մինչեւ with the infinitive: մինչեւ զարմանալ ամենեցուն 'so that everyone was amazed'. Used as a substantive, the infinitive may be found in any case: միս ուտել (N) ոչ են մեղք 'eating meat is not a sin'; յառաջ քան զլինելն (A) աշխարհի 'before the world came into being'; վասն իմոյ տանջելոյ (G) ի քէն 'because I am being tortured by you'; ակն ունեին ջրոցն յուզելոյ (D) 'they were waiting for the movement of the waters'; ի բառնալ (L) տէրութեանն ձԱրտաւանայ, ի սպանանել (L) զնա Արտաշրի 'when rule was taken from Artavan and when Artashir killed him'; գտաք զսա զի արգելոյր ի տալոյ (Ab) հարկս կայսեր 'we found him preventing the giving of tribute to Caesar'; զայդ բանս ասելով (I) եւ զմեզ թշնամանես 'by saying these words you also insult us'.

The instrumental case of the infinitive is widely used, sometimes occuring where a participle might otherwise occur: աւրինադրէ թագաւորն զինքն եւ զտուն իւր, սկիզբն առնելով (I) ի գլխոյն իւրմէ եւ ի թագէ 'the king set in order his own person and his house, beginning with himself and the crown'. The infinitive may be used in the instrumenal in an absolute sense; the logical subject in these contructions is expressed by a genitive: եկն Ներսէս ի մեջ նոցա եւ արար խաղաղութիւն, լսելով նմա թագաւորին եւ նախարարացն 'Nerses came into their midst and made peace, the king and nobles obeying him'.

18.4 Verbal Adjectives
There are two verbal adjectives often termed 'participles' by grammarians. These are derived by means of the suffixes -լոց and -լի. These are added to the same present stem from which the infinitive is derived, that is, to the present tense stem without the personal endings. Neither form makes a distinction between active and passive. The verbal adjective in -լոց is generally used as a predicate and does not occur in oblique cases. Often termed the future participle or participium necessitatis, the -լոց form often connotes futurity or necessity: սիրելոց ե 'he should love, he should be loved'; որ գալոցն ե 'that which is to come, that which shall come'. The verbal adjective in -լի, termed the participle of possibility, is used as a true adjective and may be found in any case. Its declension follows that of տեղի. Examples are սիրելի 'lovable, beloved', զարմանալի 'admirable' from զարմանամ 'I marvel', ընթեռնլի 'readable' < *-նու-լի from ընթեռնում 'I read'.

19.3 Comparative Clauses
Comparison may also be made though employment of constuctions spanning entire clauses. Some of the more common among such constructions are listed below for reference.

Correlative Comparison: The separate clauses are generally correlated by որպէս (զի)... այնպէս 'just as... , so...', though the latter conjunction is often omitted. Examples are: որպէս փափագի եղջերու յաղբերս ջուրց, այնպէս փափագի անձն իմ առ քեզ 'just as the deer yearns for the waters' springs, so my soul yearns for you'; որպէս զի ոչ ընտրեցին զԱստուած ունել ի գիտութեան, նատնեաց զնոսա Աստուած ի միտս անարգութեան 'as I did not care to hold God in esteem, so he betrayed them to a careless mind'; արար տըր, որպէս ասացն Մովսէե 'the master did as Moses had said'.

Increasing Comparison: This heading here denotes statements of the form 'better that A should B, than that C should D', where the A-B clause as a whole is compared to the C-D clause. In such statements, քան թե fills the role of the English 'than that...'. Examples are լաւ էր նմա, թե վէմ երկանաքար կախէր զպարանոցէ նորա..., քան թե գայթագղեցուցանէ զմի ոք... 'it would be better if a millstone were placed round his neck than that he should offend someone'; մեզ լաւ լիցի մեռանել քան թե ըստ աւրէնս անցանիցեմ 'it would be better for us to die than that we transgress the laws.' When the 'that that...' clause is placed first, քան may be found without թե. In this situation, քան has the sense of 'rather than that...': քան զնոսա արկանէր ի գեհեն, զնա... ընդէ՞ր ոչ արկանէր... 'rather than that he throw them into Hell... why did he not throw...?'

Correlative Increasing Comparison: Under this heading fall constructions like the English 'the more... the merrier'. Such constructions in Classical Armenian are signalled by որչափ... այնչափ or որչափ... եւս. For example, որչափ նա պատուիրէր նոցա, նոքա եւս առաւել քարոզեին 'the more he ordered them, the more they proclaimed.'

Unreal Comparison: These are introduced by the conjunctions որպէս զի, իբրեւ զի թե, որպէս թե, իբրեւ թե 'as if'; իբր ոչ եթե, իբրեւ ոչ եթե 'not as if'. The verbal mood in such clauses is variable, though the subjunctive is typical following որպէս զի, որպէս թե, իբրեւ զի and the indicative is typical following the negative իբր ոչ եթե. The indicative is also found in clauses which are not negated, e.g. որպէս թե էգ ոք ինչ էր հիւղն 'as if the matter were something female.' Other examples are որպէս զի այր մի արկանիցէ սերմանիս ձերկիր 'as if a man casts seed upon the earth'; արարին իւրեանց ձեռագործ իբրեւ զի թե աներեւոյթն Աստուած ստութեանբ ինչ պաշտիցի 'they did their work as if the invisible God would be honored by falsehoods'; իբր ոչ եթե անաւրէն ինչ եի Աստուծոյ, այլ... 'not as if I was lawless before God, rather...'.


20.2 Temporal Clauses
Contemporaneous Action: Clauses denoting action simultaneous with the main clause are set off by the conjunction մինչ. This may be reinforced by դեռ, written մինչ դեռ or մինչդեռ, or by եւ, written as մինչեւ. Thus one finds մինչդեր անցանէր, ետես այր մի 'while he was passing he saw a man'. The particle դեռ may stand alone: իբրեւ բազմեցան եւ դեռ ուտեին 'when they had sat down and while they were still eating'.

The particles մինչ and մինչեւ may be used to express 'until': մինչեւ գամ ես, միտ դիր ընթերցուածոց 'until I come, attend to the readings'. For the use of մինչեւ to express result, see the section above on the infinitive.

Constructions with քան are often used, such as ց-որ-քան 'as long as'. For example, ցորքան ունիցին զփեսայն 'as long as they have the groom'.

Antecedent Action: Expression of actions preceding that of the main clause may employ մինչ չեւ, also written together as մինչչեւ. Examples are մինչ չեւ բնաւ էր ինչ 'before anything at all existed'; մինչչեւ հաւու խաւսեալ իցէ, երիցս ուրասցես զիս 'before the cock crows you will deny me thrice'.

The conjunction յառաջ քան may express 'before'. The infinitive is often employed instead of a finite verb. For example, յառաջ քան զլինելն Աբրահամու եմ ես 'before Abraham came into being, I am'.

The conjunction իբրեւ may be used with the aorist indicative to express 'when' or 'after': իբրեւ տեսին զնա, երկիր պագին նմա 'when they saw him, they worshipped him'.

Future Action: The conjunctions իբրեւ and յ-որ-ժամ express 'when' or 'as' in a future sense: իբրեւ մտանիցէք ի քաղաքն, պատահեսցէ ձեզ այր մի 'when you enter the city, a man will meet you'; մինչեւ ցաւրն ցայն ձորժամ արբից զնա նոր 'until that day when I shall drink it afresh'.

23 Case Syntax
The most common uses of the nominal cases are outlined below. For the use of cases with simple or compound prepositions, see Section 5 of Lesson 1.

23.1 The Nominative Case
The nominative case is the case of the grammatical subject, e.g. կոյրք տեսանեն 'the blind regain their sight', աստեղք անկցին յերկնից 'stars will fall from heaven'. When the verb is a copula, the nominative is also the case of the predicate: եին արդարք երկոքին 'they were both just'. The nominative, with or without ով, may be used in forms of address: պատանի դու, արի 'get up, young man!' The nominative is also used when quoting a person's name, even if the noun representing the person so named is in another case: առ կոմսի ումեմն Լիկիանէս անուն կոչեցելոյ 'with an earl, called Likianos by name'. Here կոմսի is in the locative case, modified by կոչեցելոյ, but the name quoted, Լիկիանէս, remains in the nominative form.

The nominativus pendens is a usage whereby a word, which in its own clause should grammatically be in another case, is placed at the head of the statement in the nominative, and then taken up again by a pronoun in the correct oblique case. For example, ծառայ որ ընդ ունկն ոչ լսէ, ընդ մկանունս տան լսել նմա 'the servant, who does not listen with the ear, they make him listen with the back.' Here ծառայ is in the nominative, marked in the main clause by the pronoun նմա.

23.2 The Accusative Case
The accusative case is the case of the direct object, e.g. որ ոչ բերէ պտուղ 'which does not bear fruit'. Rarely a verb may take an internal object: երկեան երկիւղ մեծ 'they had a great fear', lit. 'they feared a great fear.' Some verbs take a double accusative, such as հարցանեմ 'I ask': հարցից ինչ զքեզ 'I ask you (something)'. The accusative may be predicate: Ստոյիկեանքն... զամենայն ինչ մարմին կարծեցին 'the Stoics held everything (to be) body.' The accusative may denote an extent of space or time. From this use come such adverbs as այնաւր '(during) this day', hence 'today'. An accusative of respect is found in the use of զայն աւրինակ 'by this means, thus', and in the use of անուն in the accusative to mean 'by name, in respect of name': առ կոմսի ումեմն Լիկիանէս անուն կոչեցելոյ 'with an earl, called Likianos by name'. The accusative form of adjectives may be used adverbially: բարւոք մարգարէացաւ 'they prophesied well'.

The accusative is often marked with the preposition զ-. This is generally used with demonstrative pronouns, relatives, personal pronouns, proper names, and nouns with a demonstrative suffix. Examples are զնա 'this', զոր 'which', զիս 'me', զհայրն 'the father', զԱբրահամ 'Abraham'. The marker զ- is not an inherent feature of the accusative case. It is often employed simply to distinguish the accusative form from the nominative or locative forms, e.g. յորժամ դուստր զմայր անտրգիցէ, եւ նու զկեսուր իւր, եւ կին զայր, եւ ծառայ զտէր, եւ եղբայր զեղբայր 'as the daughter reviled her mother, and the daughter-in-law her mother-in-law, and the wife her husband, and the servant his master, and the brother his brother.' The particles քան 'than', իբրեւ 'like, as', and որպէս 'like, as' are often followed by զ- plus the accusative of the point of comparison, e.g. ոչ Սողոմովն... զգեցաւ իբրեւ զմի ի նոցանէ 'Solomon... did not dress as one of them.'

23.3 The Genitive Case
The genitive case is the possessive case. More generally, it is a relational case, covering a wide range of nuanced meaning, usually delimiting or specifying the sphere of validity of its referent. In Classical Armenian, the genitive case is distinguished morphologically from the dative only by personal pronouns and demonstratives. The genitive may qualify a substantive, e.g. անուն նորա 'her name' or աւուր միոյ ճանապարհ 'a day's journey'. The genitive may be used as a predicate: երկու պարտապանք եին ուրումն փոխատուի 'two debtors were of a certain lender', i.e. 'there were two debtors of a certain lender', 'a certain lender had two debtors.' A genitive modifying an infinitive used as a substantive may indicate the logical subject of the action: դիւրին իցէ երկնից եւ երկրի անցանել, քան յաւրինացն միոյ նշանախեցի անկանել 'it is easier for heaven and earth to perish than for one stroke of the law to fall away.' The partitive genitive is more often expressed by the preposition ի with the ablative, in the sense 'from among'.

Perhaps the most idiosyncratic use of the genitive in Classical Armenian is with the participle in -եալ. When the subject of a clause is modified by the past participle, this subject may be in either the nominative or the genitive case, e.g. նորա առեալ զնա տարաւ 'he, having seized (him), led him'; մատուցեալ աշակերտացն նորա ասեն ցնա 'his disciples, having come, say to him...'. This usage is extended to impersonal constructions involving the participle, where the genitive denotes the logical subject: զպայն իսկ իմ աչաւք տեսեալ է 'I have seen the fairy with my own eyes'; առ եկեղեցեաւն, զոր շինեալ էր առաջնոյն մեծին Գրիգորի 'at the church which the first great Grigor had built.'

23.4 The Dative Case
The dative case is the case of the indirect object, or, more generally, the case of the party interested in, but not directly affected by, the actions of the statement. The dative is used frequently with verbs. Examples are ցուցէք ինձ զդահեկան 'show me the money'; կին քո ծնչի քեզ որդի 'your woman bore you a son.' Several verbs take their object in the dative, such as տիրեմ 'I rule', իշխեմ 'I have power', առաջնորդեմ 'I lead', սաստեմ 'I command', թագաւորեմ 'I rule as king', յաղթեմ 'I overwhelm'; հնազանդիմ 'I comply', ծառայեմ 'I serve', անսամ 'I conform'; հաւատամ 'I believe', ողորմիմ 'I have compassion', սպասեմ 'I tend', ներեմ 'I forgive'; կարաւտիմ and կարաւտանամ 'I use'; ցանկանամ 'I wish'; վնասեմ 'I harm', բարկանամ 'I become angry', սպառնամ 'I threaten'; տեղեկանամ 'I learn of'. Examples are ապա թե ոչ տիրեսցեն ինձ 'if they not have power over me'; ինձ սպասեցին մեղաւորք 'sinners served me'; տեղեկացաւ հայրենի գործոցն 'he learned of his father's deeds.' The dative may serve as a predicate when the verb is a copula, e.g. եղեւ նմա չար եւ ոչ ինչ 'no evil befell him.'

The dative is also used with adjectives. These may denote similarity, e.g. նման 'similar, like', հասարակ 'common, public', համեմատ 'proportional, commensurate'; or they may denote knowledge, e.g. գիտակ 'knowing', տեղեակ 'well-informed, instructed, skilled-in', հմուտ 'knowledgeable, skilled, learned', խելամուտ 'taught, informed, learned'; or usefulness, e.g. պիտանի, պիտոյ 'helpful', անպիտան 'useless', հաճոյ 'pleasing', վնասակար 'harmful', պատրաստ 'prepared', պարտական 'guilty'. Examples are երկրորդն նման սմին 'the second similar to this one'; մեռեալք ոչ են գիտակ եւ ոչ իմիք 'the dead know nothing'; չէ այնմ պարտական Աստուած 'God is not to blame for this.'

In clauses with the infinitive, the dative may often be considered to be related to one word in particular, usually the infinitive itself. In these situations the dative often supplies the subject of the action denoted by the infinitive, e.g. եղեւ շաբաթու... անչանել նմա ընդ արտորայսն 'it happened on the sabbath... that he went through the fields'; պարտ է ինձ աւետարանել 'it is necessary for me to preach.' Such constructions occur where Latin and Greek might employ an accusative and infinitive.

23.5 The Locative Case
The locative case denotes static position in space or time, generally equivalent to the English 'in', 'on', or 'at'. In Classical Armenian the locative is only found with prepositions. By far the most common preposition is ի, e.g. յայնմ կղզւոջ ոչ գտանէր ոչ ջուր... եւ ոչ... 'on this island was found neither water nor...'. It is also used with առ 'beside', e.g. նստէր առ դուրս 'he sat by the door'; with ընդ 'with', e.g. խաւսել ընդ նոսա 'to speak with them'; seldom with զ-, e.g. զգետնի հարկանել 'to cast on the ground'; with ըստ 'after', e.g. հատուցանես իւրաքանչիւր ըստ գործս իւր 'you shall repay each according to his deeds.'

23.6 The Ablative Case
The ablative case denotes the source or origin, and separation therefrom. The ablative is used without a preposition only in certain fixed situations, generally in conjunction with a monosyllabic substantive in the accusative, often marked by ի. Examples are զ'ամէ ի ժամ 'from time to time'; ամ յամէ 'each year'; տանէ ի տուն 'from house to house'; ազգէ յազգ 'from people to people'; մինչեւ ի նաւասարդէ նաւասարդ 'from new year to new year', that is, 'till the new year'; ի քաղաքէ ի քաղաք 'from city to city'. The ablative forms of personal pronoun, such as ինձէն and քեզըն, may be used without propositions, typically with the meaning 'self': ես ինձէն աս՛աւք տեսի 'I have seen it with my own eyes.'

23.7 The Instrumental Case
The instrumental case denotes the means or instrument of an action, whether physical or other. It roughly takes the place of the English preposition 'with'. Examples are ոչ ոք գայ առ հայր, եթե ոչ իմեւ 'no one approaches the father, except though me'; ելեալ... ի գերեզմանէ անտի ահիւ եւ խնդութեամբ բազմաւ 'having gone... from the grave with awe and great joy'; լի խնկով 'filled with incense'. The instrumental may be used predicatively: որեարն այն խաղաղութեամբ են ընդ մեզ 'these men are peaceful with us'; մեր կեանքս չեն յուսահատութեամբ 'our life is not (fallen) into despair.' The instrumental is used in the sense of accompaniment, usually in conjunction with following հանդերձ 'with, together with': անդ նստէր աշակերտաւքն հանդերձ 'he sat there with his disciples'; Յիսուս աշակերտաւքն իւրովք գնաց 'Jesus withdrew with his disciples.'

24 Future Expression and the Subjunctive
Classical Armenian lacks a morphologically distinct future tense. Inasmuch as the subjunctive expresses purpose, wish, demand, or prospect, its sense is linked to the expression of future events. It is therefore common to find the Greek future translated by the aorist subjunctive. Within native treatments of Armenian grammar it has thus been common to find the aorist subjunctive called the future tense. Since there is also a present subjunctive, some treatments refer to two future tenses. The subjunctive is not, however, the only means of relating future time in Classical Armenian. When particular emphasis or clarity is required, the present tense may express future action, e.g. ոչ հաւատամ 'I will not believe'. When there is an attendant sense of necessity, the verbal adjective in -լոց is often employed in periphrastic constructions: դու ես որ գալոցն ես 'Art thou He who is to come?'.

25 Adverbial Clauses
The term adverbial clauses is here used as a catch-all term for several types of clauses which modify a statement as a whole. This is in contrast to, say, relative clauses, which usually modify a substantive within a given statement. Typically in such clauses the subjunctive and indicative moods of the verb stand in free contrast. That is to say, the indicative is generally used for actual action, otherwise the subjunctive. Some of the more important types of clauses are listed below with general comments on construction.

Final Clauses: The verb of final clauses is always subjunctive. The beginning of such clauses is typically signalled by զի, less often by թե, եթե, or որպէս զի. Examples are այլ այս ամենայն եղեւ, զի լցցի որ ասացաւն ի տեառնէ 'this all happened so that what the Lord had said be fulfilled'; ...եթե գաւրավարին հաճոյ լինիցի '... so that he be pleasing to the one enlisting'; որպէս զի տեսցեն զգործս ձեր բարիս 'so that they may know your good deeds'. If the subject or object is the same as in the main clause, the final clause is typically expressed by an infinitive: տարան զնա ի խաչ հանել 'they led him out to crucify (him)'. A final clause with a subject different from that of the main clause may be expressed with a dative plus infinitive construction: խնայեցի ես ի քեզ, չմեղանճել քեզ յիս 'I look after you that you not sin against me.'

Consecutive Clauses: Also termed resultative clauses, these are introduced by որպէս զի, իբրեւ զի 'so that'; or simply զի 'that' or զի եւ (when the preceding clause contains a word meaning 'so' or 'in such a way'). Less frequently եթե or մինչեւ introduce these clauses. Examples are չարաչարք յոյժ, որպէս զի չեր հնար անցանել ումեք ընդ այն ճանապարհ 'exceedingly harsh, so that it was not possible for any one to proceed by that path'; այնչափ եմք ողորմելի իբրեւ զի առանց ձորձոյ մի աւր չկարեմք համբերել 'we are so dejected that we cannot go one day without a coat'; Աստուած այնպէս պատուել զմարդն կամեցաւ, զի գանձնիչխանութիւնն պարգեւեաց նմա 'God wanted to so honor man that He granted him free will.' An extended example of the use of եթե is the following: քանզի ոչ եթե անմիտ ինչ ոք եղեւ նա ձԱստուծոյ, եթե չգիտէր, եթե որ ինչ ըստ Աստուծոյ կամացն լինի, բարի է 'since there was none created by God so ignorant that he knew not that whatever happened by the will of God is good.'

Temporal Clauses: These have been treated separately in Lesson 4, Section 20.

Causal Clauses: These are usually introduced by զի, քանզի, վասն զի, թե or եթե, որովհետեւ 'since, because'; մանաւանդ զի 'especially since'. If the causal clause treats a factual occurrence, the verb is conjugated in the indicative; if the clause treats an assumed occurrence or one which is denied or refuted, the verb may be either indicative or subjunctive. Examples are զիա՞րդ լինիցի ինձ այդ, քանզի զայր ոչ գիտեմ 'how will this be, since I do not know a man'; ընդէ՞ր զխաւսս իմ ոչ գիտէք դուք, վասն զի ոչ կարէք լսել զբանն իմ 'on what account do you not know my speech? since you are not able to hear my word'; մանաւանդ զի գտանեմք 'especially since we find'. զի may be strengthened by the demonstrative այս or its instrumental form այնու, e.g. այնու զի ըստ չարեաց գործոչն վրէժս պահանջիցէ, յայտ է եթե... 'since he imposes penalties according to the wicked deeds, so it is clear that...'.

Concessive Clauses: These are introduced by թէպէտ, թեպէտ 'though, although', usually followed by եւ; թե եւ 'even though'; թեպէտ... թեպէտ 'be it that... be it that'; եթե... (եւ) եթե 'either... or'. Examples are թէպէտ եւ որդի է, ուսաւ զհնազանդութիւն 'though being the son, he learned obedience'; եւ չեմ թեպէտ արժանի 'though I am not worthy'; թե եւ տրտմեցուցի զձեզ թղթովն ոչ զղջանամ 'even if I pained you in the letter, I am not sorry'; արդ, ըտե ուտիցէք, եթե ըմպիցէք 'therefore, either eat or drink!'

Local Clauses: These are introduced either by relative adverbs ձո 'to where, whither', ուր 'where, to where', ուստի 'from where, whence' or by prepositional constructions involving relative adverbs. Examples are ուր գանձք ձեր են անդ եւ սիրտք ձեր եղիցին 'where your treasures are, there too will be your heart'; յոր տուն մտանիցէք, անդէն աւթեւանս կալջիք 'in whichever house you enter, take accomodations there.'

Comparative Clauses: These have been treated in Lesson 4, Section 19.

Exceptional Clauses: Under this heading are grouped clauses often beginning in English with 'unless, except that..., save that..., save to...'. In some instances Classical Armenian uses a construction with infinitive and preposition, or with a negative participle: ոչինչ գործեալ... մատնեցայ 'but had I done something,... I was betrayed'. Elsewhere clauses with finite verb forms are employed. բայց եթե often serves as English 'unless', usually followed by the subjunctive: ո՞վ է սկիզբն այնպիսի անպատեհից, բայց եթե իցէ ինչ չար զաւրութիւն 'who is the origin of such inconsistencies, unless it is an evil force.' փոխանակ զի, and sometimes քան, renders English 'rather than that': փոխանակ զի պարտ եր ձեզ լինել վարդապետս, պիտոյ է ձեզ ուսանել 'rather than that you should become teacher, it is proper that you learn.'

Conditional Clauses: The subordinate clause (protasis) is introduced by the conjunction եթե, less often թե, and only rarely with զի. Use of զի in particular gives the sense 'when, in the case that': զի առանց կամացն Աստուծոյ գործին իրք ինչ, լինին չար 'in the case that things are done contrary to the will of God, they are bad.' The conjunction need not be the first word of the clause. ոչ is always used for negation. The main clause (apodosis) is signalled by ապա, եւ, or ապա եւ when it follows the protasis. There are three basic constructions:

Protasis: present indicative; Apodosis: indicative, subjunctive (as future), or imperative. These are the components of real conditions. Examples are եթե ոչ լսեն, եւ ոչ հաւատասցեն 'if they do not hear, they will not believe'; եթե հոգի բնակեալ է ի ձեզ, ապա կենդանացուսցէ 'if the spirit dwells in you, it will give life'; եթե մեռեալք ոչ յառնեն, ապա եւ Քրիստոս չէ յարուցեալ 'for if the dead do not rise, neither has Christ risen.'
Protasis: subjunctive; Apodosis: indicative, subjunctive (as future), or imperative. These are the components of conditions signifying assumption, possibility, uncertainty, or generalization. Examples are զայս ամենայն քեզ տաց, եթե երկիրպագանիցես ինձ 'all these things I will give you, if you bow before me'; եթե ի մեռելոց ոք երթիցէ առ նոսա, եւ ապաշխարեսցեն 'if one of the dead journey to them, they will repent'; եթե ոչ ոք ծնցի վերստին, ոչ կարէ տեսանել զարքայութիւն Աստուծոյ 'if one be not born from above, he is unable to behold the kingdom of God.'
Protasis: past indicative; Apodosis: past indicative. These describe unreal conditions. Unreal conditions concerning the present employ the imperfect indicative in both clauses: սա թե մարգարէ ոք էր, ապա գիտէր... 'if this one were prophet, he would know...'; եթե Աստուած էր հայր ձեր, սիրեիք արդեաւք զիս 'if God were your father, you would love me.' Unreal conditions concerning the past typically employ a periphrastic pluperfect in either the protasis or apodosis, with a suitable past tense in the complementary clause. Examples are ըտե աստ լեալ եիր, եղբայրն իմ չէր մեռեալ 'if you had been here, my brother would not have died'; իմ եթե չէր եկեալ, եւ խաւսեցեալ ընդ նոսա, մեղ ինչ ոչ գոյր նոցա 'if I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have possessed sin.'